welcome in this exercise you will learn
how to develop your concentration by
focusing on your breath in stages you
will also hear why concentration is
important and receive guidance on how to
handle the inevitable difficulties that
will arise when you are finished you may
feel more focused immediately with
repeated use you may notice a lasting
improvement in your ability to
concentrate as well as your overall
awareness and well-being practice
versions are also available for each
stage in various lengths let's begin
find or create a quiet space now if
possible choose some where you can close
your eyes without concern if you like
sit on a cushion with your legs folded
in front of you you can also sit in a
chair without using the backrest if you
lean back just try to keep as upright as
possible now loosen all restrictive
clothing turn off any ringers and switch
your mobile phone or tablet to airplane
mode we will remind you there off when
the session is over if you need to pause
this recording now until you are ready
place your hands on your knees or in
your lap palms up one on top of the
other if possible let your eyes close
now take a few deep breaths through your
nose long and slow
feel your belly filling on the in-breath
let it empty on the out-breath
now let go control of your breath and
just breathe naturally let the breath
determine its own length let your breath
continue on its own while we provide
some background information then we'll
go deeper concentration is your ability
to choose what you pay attention to and
what you ignore and to hold your
attention where you want to improving it
will improve your working memory verbal
reasoning problem-solving and
decision-making concentration is also
closely related to emotional
intelligence and self-control
it takes place in the same part of the
brain where we delay gratification and
control impulses not surprisingly much
research links good concentration to
high academic achievement and future
earnings as well as to lower rates of
addiction and other problems fortunately
a simple method exists for strengthening
your concentration just by focusing on
your breath we'll show you all four
stages of this method now when you
practice on your own you can stay with
each stage as long as you like before
moving on continue breathing naturally
and be sure you're in a comfortable and
stable position you want to be relaxed
but alert now let the breath continue on
its own and place your attention at the
entrance to your nose notice how it
feels just inside your nose when you
breathe cool air going in warm air going
out try it for a moment now
cool in warm out
this will be your home base the place
you returned to when your mind wanders
the place just inside your nose where
you most feel your breath now we'll
learn stage 1 continue breathing
naturally just follow your breath
without controlling it after your
in-breath mentally count 1 after your
out-breath
mentally count 2 then 3 and so on up to
10 try it for a few breaths now
were you able to do it don't worry if
you didn't it's quite common to lose
count when your mind wanders the
important thing is not to judge or
criticize yourself simply notice that
your mind has wandered then gently
blamelessly return your attention to
your breathing just inside your nose on
the next in-breath begin again at number
one in stage one we count one number for
each in-breath and one number for each
out breath when you get to ten you start
over with the number one when you
practice on your own stay with stage one
as long as you like now we'll show you
stage two return your attention to your
nose and breath continue breathing
naturally this time breathe in and out
before counting one this may not seem
harder but it is you take twice as many
breaths before counting ten and starting
over try it for a few breaths now
you
again practice stage two on your own as
long as you like now we'll learn stage
three in stage three you stop counting
and simply say the words in and out with
each in and out breath again this may
not seem much harder but it is
let's try focus your attention just
inside your nose where you most feel
your breath now as you breathe say these
words inside your head in out
in
out now for a few more breaths on your
own
there's no set length of time for how
long you stay with each stage it depends
on how frequently you practice when you
can do any stage for five minutes
without losing focus you are ready for
the next now we learn stage 4 stage 4 is
what you can practice forever in stage 4
you watch your breath with no internal
words at all place your attention once
again at the entrance to your nose where
you most feel your breathing let your
breath breathe itself feel the cool air
going in again feel the warm air going
out now watch and feel your breathing
without any words at all try it for a
moment now
in stage four you progress by wordlessly
focusing on your breath for longer
periods of time when you can do it for
five minutes try 10 then 15 then 20 for
most people 20 minutes is a good length
of time it is also the length when most
of the benefits can be expected if you
practice regularly but don't push
yourself it could take a month or a year
or even more or maybe never remember
that many benefits still come from
shorter sessions now we'll talk about
distractions
keep breathing naturally while we do no
matter how well you pay attention to
your breath sooner or later you will
lose your focus this is especially true
when you practice on your own again the
most important thing is not to judge or
criticize yourself distractions are
anything that takes your focus from your
breathing these are only your five
senses plus your thoughts and feelings
you will hear sounds you will feel
sensations in your body you will realize
you are thinking we will treat them all
the same simply notice each when it
arises then let it go and gently return
your attention to your breath let's try
whatever interrupts you next just notice
it let it go and refocus on your
breathing try it for a moment now
you
let it go does not mean push it away be
dispassionate be gentle
neither pursue distractions nor repel
them nor judge yourself for having them
when your mind wanders simply notice
that it has wandered and gently bring it
back place your attention back inside
your nose and watch and feel your breath
try it again now
you may have learned or have the urge to
name the thing distracting you to say a
silent word inside your mind you may say
Barking of a dog barks or itching if you
feel an itch or you may name the process
rather than the thing itself you may
just say hearing for the dog feeling for
the itch or simply thinking for a
thought both of these are fine but for
this exercise try something even simpler
try naming just one thing when you lose
your focus simply notice that and not
the thing distracting you if you say a
mental word just say distracted or
wandering to describe your mind then
gently bring your mind back to your
breath try it for a moment now
finally as with the breath itself try
using no internal words at all just
notice that you've lost your focus and
gently bring it back back to your nose
and the feeling of your breath try this
final practice for a longer moment now
you
in a few moments we will complete this
exercise before we do keep your eyes
closed a bit longer and remember a few
things
concentration is like a muscle in your
mind the ones that holds your attention
in one place if you want to be strong
for life you don't stop working out or
going to the gym this exercise is like
going to the gym for your mind with
practice you can learn to concentrate
for long periods without distraction
over time you may receive other benefits
as well physical mental emotional and
psychological don't be surprised if you
experience a calm or tranquility like
nothing you've felt before or even a
profound peace of mind and overall
well-being remember too that you do not
need to be sitting on your chair or
cushion to practice breathing
concentration you can do it for one
minute or even one breath anytime and
anywhere throughout your day try it and
see what happens and know that your
experiences are not you just like your
breath thoughts and feelings are just
things you experience with your mind and
body the same as you experience a sound
with your ear or a smell with your nose
but they are not you now when you are
ready slowly open your eyes if they are
closed
notice how you feel compared to when you
started appreciate your efforts
whatever you were able to do or however
your mind wandered the time you took
today itself is your success know that
you can repeat this exercise as often as
you like and return to this place inside
yourself whenever you choose remember
that your ringers and mobile devices
have been turned off we hope you have
enjoyed this exercise and found it
helpful